

Candidate Number
Candidate Name:
___________________________________________

Class: ________________________  School/Workplace: __________________________________

IELTS READING TEST 28
Time: 1 hour



INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
Do not open this question paper until you are told to do so.
Write your name and candidate number in the spaces at the top of this page.
Read the instructions for each task carefully.
Answer all the questions.
Write your answers on the answer sheet. Use a pencil.
You must complete the answer sheet within the time limit.
At the end of the test, hand in both this question paper and your answer sheets.

INFORMATION FOR CANDIDATES
There are 40 questions on this questions paper.
Each question carries one mark.








READING PASSAGE 1 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1-13, which are based on Reading Passage 1.
The Great Australian Fence

A
 war has been going on for almost a hundred years between the sheep farmers of Australia and the dingo, Australia's wild dog. To protect their livelihood, the farmers built a wire fence, 3,307 miles of continuous wire mesh, reaching from the coast of South Australia all the way to the cotton fields of eastern Queensland, just short of the Pacific Ocean.
The Fence is Australia's version of the Great Wall of China, but even longer, erected to keep out hostile invaders, in this case hordes of yellow dogs. The empire it preserves is that of the woolgrowers, sovereigns of the world's second largest sheep flock, after China's some 123 million head - and keepers of a wool export business worth four billion dollars. Never mind that more and more people conservationists, politicians, taxpayers and animal lovers say that such a barrier would never be allowed today on ecological grounds. With sections of it almost a hundred years old, the dog fence has become, as conservationist Lindsay Fairweather ruefully admits, 'an icon of Australian frontier ingenuity'.

To appreciate this unusual outback monument and to meet the people whose livelihoods depend on it, I spent part of an Australian autumn travelling the wire. It's known by different names in different states: the Dog Fence in South Australia, the Border Fence in New South Wales and the Barrier Fence in Queensland. I would call it simply the Fence.
For most of its prodigious length, this epic fence winds like a river across a landscape that, unless a big rain has fallen, scarcely has rivers. The eccentric route, prescribed mostly by property lines, provides a sampler of outback topography: the Fence goes over sand dunes, past salt lakes, up and down rock-strewn hills, through dense scrub and across barren plains.
The Fence stays away from towns. Where it passes near a town, it has actually become a tourist attraction visited on bus tours. It marks the traditional dividing line between cattle and sheep. Inside, where the dingoes are legally classified as vermin, they are shot, poisoned and trapped. Sheep and dingoes do not mix and the Fence sends that message mile after mile.
What is this creature that by itself threatens an entire industry, inflicting several millions of dollars of damage a year despite the presence of the world's most obsessive fence? Cousin to the coyote and the jackal, descended from the Asian wolf, Canis lupus dingo is an introduced species of wild dog. Skeletal remains indicate that the dingo was introduced to Australia more than 3,500 years ago probably with Asian seafarers who landed on the north coast. The adaptable dingo spread rapidly and in a short time became the top predator, killing off all its marsupial competitors. The dingo looks like a small wolf with a long nose, short pointed ears and a bushy tail. Dingoes rarely bark; they yelp and howl. Standing about 22 inches at the shoulder slightly taller than a coyote - the dingo is Australia's largest land carnivore.
The woolgrowers' war against dingoes, which is similar to the sheep ranchers' rage against coyotes in the US, started not long after the first European settlers disembarked in 1788, bringing with them a cargo of sheep. Dingoes officially became outlaws in 1830 when governments placed a bounty on their heads. Today bounties for problem dogs killing sheep inside the Fence can reach $500. As pioneers penetrated the interior with their flocks of sheep, fences replaced shepherds until, by the end of the 19th century, thousands of miles of barrier fencing crisscrossed the vast grazing lands.
'The dingo started out as a quiet observer,' writes Roland Breckwoldt, in A Very Elegant Animal: The Dingo, 'but soon came to represent everything that was dark and dangerous on the continent.' It is estimated that since sheep arrived in Australia, dingo numbers have increased a hundredfold. Though dingoes have been eradicated from parts of Australia, an educated guess puts the population at more than a million.
Eventually government officials and graziers agreed that one well-maintained fence, placed on the outer rim of sheep country and paid for by taxes levied on woolgrowers, should supplant the maze of private netting. By 1960, three states joined their barriers to form a single dog fence.
The intense private battles between woolgrowers and dingoes have usually served to define the Fence only in economic terms. It marks the difference between profit and loss. Yet the Fence casts a much broader ecological shadow for it has become a kind of terrestrial dam, deflecting the flow of animals inside and out. The ecological side effects appear most vividly at Sturt National Park. In 1845, explorer Charles Sturt led an expedition through these parts on a futile search for an inland sea. For Sturt and other early explorers, it was a rare event to see a kangaroo. Now they are ubiquitous for without a native predator the kangaroo population has exploded inside the Fence. Kangaroos are now cursed more than dingoes. They have become the rivals of sheep, competing for water and grass. In response state governments cull* more than three million kangaroos a year to keep Australia's national symbol from overrunning the pastoral lands. Park officials, who recognise that the fence is to blame, respond to the excess of kangaroos by saying 'The fence is there, and we have to live with it.'
*Cull = to kill animals to reduce their population.

Questions 1-4
Choose the appropriate letters A-D and write them in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.
1Why was the fence built?
A  to separate the sheep from the cattle
B  to stop the dingoes from being slaughtered by farmers
C  to act as a boundary between properties
D  to protect the Australian wool industry
2On what point do the conservationists and politicians agree?
A  Wool exports are vital to the economy.
B  The fence poses a threat to the environment.
C  The fence acts as a useful frontier between states.
D  The number of dogs needs to be reduced.
3Why did the author visit Australia?
A  to study Australian farming methods
B  to investigate how the fence was constructed
C  because he was interested in life around the fence
D  because he wanted to learn more about the wool industry
4How does the author feel about the fence?
A  impressed
B  delighted
C  shocked
D  annoyed



Questions 5-11
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1?
In boxes 5-11 on your answer sheet write
YESif the statement agrees with the information
NOif the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVENif there is no information on this in the passage
5    The fence serves a different purpose in each state.
6    The fence is only partially successful.
7    The dingo is indigenous to Australia.
8    Dingoes have flourished as a result of the sheep industry.
9    Dingoes are known to attack humans.
10  Kangaroos have increased in number because of the fence.
11  The author does not agree with the culling of kangaroos.

Questions 12-13
Choose the appropriate letters A-D and write them in boxes 12-13 on your answer sheet.
12    When did the authorities first acknowledge the dingo problem?
A  1788
B  1830
C  1845
D  1960
13    How do the park officials feel about the fence?
A   philosophical
B   angry
C   pleased
D   proud
READING PASSAGE 2
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading Passage 2 below.
Endless Harvest
More than two hundred years ago, Russian explorers and fur hunters landed on the Aleutian Islands, a volcanic archipelago in the North Pacific, and learned of a land mass that lay farther to the north. The islands' native inhabitants called this land mass Aleyska, the 'Great Land'; today, we know it as Alaska.
The forty-ninth state to join the United States of America (in 1959), Alaska is fully one-fifth the size of the mainland 48 states combined. It shares, with Canada, the second longest river system in North America and has over half the coastline of the United States. The rivers feed into the Bering Sea and Gulf of Alaska- cold, nutrient-rich waters which support tens of millions of seabirds, and over 400 species of fish, shellfish, crustaceans, and molluscs. Taking advantage of this rich bounty, Alaska's commercial fisheries have developed into some of the largest in the world.
According to the Alaska Department of Fish and Game (ADF&G), Alaska's commercial fisheries landed hundreds of thousands of tonnes of shellfish and herring, and well over a million tonnes of groundfish (cod, sole, perch and pollock) in 2000. The true cultural heart and soul of Alaska's fisheries, however, is salmon. 'Salmon,' notes writer Susan Ewing in The Great Alaska Nature Factbook, 'pump through Alaska like blood through a heart, bringing rhythmic, circulating nourishment to land, animals and people.' The 'predictable abundance of salmon allowed some native cultures to flourish,' and 'dying spawners* feed bears, eagles, other animals, and ultimately the soil itself. All five species of Pacific salmon-chinook, or king; chum, or dog; coho, or silver; sockeye, or red; and pink, or humpback-spawn** in Alaskan waters, and 90% of all Pacific salmon commercially caught in North America are produced there. Indeed, if Alaska was an independent nation, it would be the largest producer of wild salmon in the world. During 2000, commercial catches of Pacific salmon in Alaska exceeded 320,000 tonnes, with an ex-vessel value of over $US260 million.
Catches have not always been so healthy. Between 1940 and 1959, overfishing led to crashes in salmon populations so severe that in 1953 Alaska was declared a federal disaster area. With the onset of statehood, however, the State of Alaska took over management of its own fisheries, guided by a state constitution which mandates that Alaska's natural resources be managed on a sustainable basis. At that time, statewide harvests totalled around 25 million salmon. Over the next few decades average catches steadily increased as a result of this policy of sustainable management, until, during the 1990s, annual harvests were well in excess of 100 million, and on several occasions over 200 million fish.
The primary reason for such increases is what is known as 'In-Season Abundance-Based Management'. There are biologists throughout the state constantly monitoring adult fish as they show up to spawn. The biologists sit in streamside counting towers, study sonar, watch from aeroplanes, and talk to fishermen. The salmon season in Alaska is not pre-set. The fishermen know the approximate time of year when they will be allowed to fish, but on any given day, one or more field biologists in a particular area can put a halt to fishing. Even sport fishing can be brought to a halt. It is this management mechanism that has allowed Alaska salmon stocks - and, accordingly, Alaska salmon fisheries- to prosper, even as salmon populations in the rest of the United States are increasingly considered threatened or even endangered.
In 1999, the Marine Stewardship Council (MSC)*** commissioned a review of the Alaska salmon fishery. The Council, which was founded in 1996, certifies fisheries that meet high environmental standards, enabling them to use a label that recognises their environmental responsibility. The MSC has established a set of criteria by which commercial fisheries can be judged. Recognising the potential benefits of being identified as environmentally responsible, fisheries approach the Council requesting to undergo the certification process. The MSC then appoints a certification committee, composed of a panel of fisheries experts, which gathers information and opinions from fishermen, biologists, government officials, industry representatives, non-governmental organisations and others.
Some observers thought the Alaska salmon fisheries would not have any chance of certification when, in the months leading up to MSC's final decision, salmon runs throughout western Alaska completely collapsed. In the Yukon and Kuskokwim rivers, chinook and chum runs were probably the poorest since statehood; subsistence communities throughout the region, who normally have priority over commercial fishing, were devastated.
The crisis was completely unexpected, but researchers believe it had nothing to do with impacts of fisheries. Rather, they contend, it was almost certainly the result of climatic shifts, prompted in part by cumulative effects of the el niño/la niña phenomenon on Pacific Ocean temperatures, culminating in a harsh winter in which huge numbers of salmon eggs were frozen. It could have meant the end as far as the certification process was concerned. However, the state reacted quickly, closing down all fisheries, even those necessary for subsistence purposes.
In September 2000, MSC announced that the Alaska salmon fisheries qualified for certification. Seven companies producing Alaska salmon were immediately granted permission to display the MSC logo on their products. Certification is for an initial period of five years, with an annual review to ensure that the fishery is continuing to meet the required standards.
-----------------------
* spawners: fish that have released eggs
** spawn: release eggs
*** MSC: a joint venture between WWF (World Wildlife Fund) and Unilever, a Dutch-based mult-national 

Questions 14-20
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 2?
In boxes 14-20 on your answer sheet, write
TRUEif the statement agrees with the information
FALSEif the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVENif there is no information on this
14    The inhabitants of the Aleutian islands renamed their islands 'Aleyska'. 
15    Alaska's fisheries are owned by some of the world's largest companies.
16    Life in Alaska is dependent on salmon.
17    Ninety per cent of all Pacific salmon caught are sockeye or pink salmon.
18    More than 320,000 tonnes of salmon were caught in Alaska in 2000.
19    Between 1940 and 1959, there was a sharp decrease in Alaska's salmon population. 
20    During the 1990s, the average number of salmon caught each year was 100 million.

Questions 21-26
Complete each sentence with the correct ending, A-K, below.
Write the correct letter, A-K, in boxes 21-26 on your answer sheet.
21    In Alaska, biologists keep a check on adult fish
22    Biologists have the authority
23    In-Season Abundance-Based Management has allowed the Alaska salmon fisheries
24    The Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) was established
25    As a result of the collapse of the salmon runs in 1999, the state decided
26    In September 2000, the MSC allowed seven Alaska salmon companies
A     to recognise fisheries that care for the environment.
B     to be successful.
C     to stop fish from spawning.
D    to set up environmental protection laws.
E    to stop people fishing for sport.
F    to label their products using the MSC logo.
G    to ensure that fish numbers are sufficient to permit fishing. 
H    to assist the subsistence communities in the region.
I     to freeze a huge number of salmon eggs.
J     to deny certification to the Alaska fisheries.
K    to close down all fisheries.





Reading Passage 3
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading Passage 3 below.
Learning about the past
If the past is a foreign country, the version that used to be taught in Irish schools had a simple landscape. For 750 years after the first invasion by an English king, Ireland suffered from oppression. Then at Easter 1916, her brave sons rose against the tyrant; their leaders were shot but their cause prevailed, and Ireland (or 26 of her 32 counties) lived happily ever after. Awkward episodes, like the conflict between rival Irish nationalist groups in 1922-23, were airbrushed away. "The civil war was just an embarrassment, it was hardly mentioned," says Jimmy Joyce, who went to school in Dublin in the 1950s.
These days, Irish history lessons are more sophisticated. They deal happily with facts that have no place in a plain tale of heroes and tyrants: like the fact that hundreds of thousands of Irish people, Catholic and Protestant, fought for Britain during the two world wars. Why the change? First because in the 1980s, some people in Ireland became uneasy about the fact that a crude view of their national history was fuelling a conflict in the north of the island. Then came a fall in the influence of the Catholic church, whose authority had rested on a deft fusion between religion and patriotism. Also at work was an even broader shift: a state that was rich, confident and cosmopolitan saw less need to drum simple ideas into its youth, especially if those ideas risked encouraging violence.
As countries all over the world argue over "what to tell the children" about their collective past, many will look to Ireland rather enviously. Its seamless transition from a nationalist view of history to an open- minded one is an exception. A history curriculum is often a telling sign of how a nation and its elites see themselves: as victims of colonialism or practitioners (either repentant or defiant) of imperial power. In the modern history of Mexico, for example, a big landmark was the introduction, 15 years ago, textbooks that were a bit less anti-America.
Many states still see history teaching and the inculcation of foundation myths, as a strategic imperative; others see it as an exercise in teaching children to think for themselves. The experience of several countries suggests that, whatever educators and politicians might want, there is a limit to how far history lessons can diverge in their tone from society as a whole.
Take Australia. John Howard, the conservative prime minister, has made history one of his favourite causes. At a "history summit" he held last August, educators were urged to "re-establish a structured narrative" about the nation's past. This was seen by liberal critics as a doomed bid to revive a romantic vision of white settlement in the 18th century. The romantic story has been fading since the 1980s, when a liberal, revisionist view came to dominate curricula: one that replaced "settlement" with "invasion" and that looked for the first time at the stories of aborigines and women. How much difference have Australia's policy battles made to what children in that cosmopolitan land are taught? Under Mr Howard's 11-year government, "multicultural" and "aboriginal reconciliation", two terms that once had currency, have faded from the policy lexicon, but not from classrooms. Australia's curricula are controlled by the states, not from Canberra. Most states have rolled Australian history into social studies courses, often rather muddled. In New South Wales, where the subject is taught in its own right, Mr Howard's bid to promote a patriotic view of history meets strong resistance.
Judy King, head of Riverside Girls High School in Sydney, has students from more than 40 ethnic groups at her school. "It's simply not possible to present one story to them, and nor do we," she says. "We canvass all the terms for white settlement: colonialism, invasion and genocide. Are all views valid? Yes. What's the problem with that? If the prime minister wants a single narrative instead, then speaking as someone who's taught history for 42 years he'll have an absolute fight on his hands." Tom Ying, head of history at Burwood Girls High School in Sydney, grew up as a Chinese child in the white Australia of the 1950s. In a school where most students are from non-English-speaking homes, he welcomes an approach that includes the dark side of European settlement. "When you have only one side of the story, immigrants, women and aborigines aren't going to have an investment in it."
Australia is a country where a relatively gentle (by world standards) effort to re-impose a sort of national ideology looks destined to fail. Russia, by contrast, is a country where the general principle of a toughly enforced ideology, and a national foundation story, still seems natural to many people, including the country's elite. In a telling sign of how he wants Russians to imagine their past, President Vladimir Putin has introduced a new national day November 4th - to replace the old communist Revolution Day holiday on November 7th. What the new date recalls is the moment in 1612 when Russia, after a period of chaos, drove the Catholic Poles and Lithuanians out of Moscow. Despite the bonhomie of this week's 25-minute chat between Mr Putin and Pope Benedict XVI, the president is promoting a national day which signals "isolation and defensiveness" towards western Christendom, says Andrei Zorin, a Russian historian.
In South Africa, where white rule collapsed at the same time as communism did elsewhere, the authorities seem to have done a better job at forging a new national story and avoiding the trap of replacing one rigid ideology with another. "The main message of the new school curriculum is inclusion and reconciliation," says Linda Chisholm, who designed post-apartheid lessons. "We teach pupils to handle primary sources, like oral history and documents, instead of spoon-feeding them on textbooks," adds Aled Jones, a history teacher at Bridge House school in Cape Province. It helps that symbols and anniversaries have been redefined with skill. December 16th was a day to remember white settlers clashing with the Zulus in 1838; now it is the Day of Reconciliation.

Questions 27-30
For each question, only ONE of the choices is correct.
Write the corresponding letter the appropriate box on your answer sheet.
27   The Irish Civil War was not taught much in Ireland in the past because
A    it didn't fit in with the history of the Irish fighting British rule.
B    the Irish people couldn't understand why it happened.
C    the Irish didn't want to anger the British.
28    John Howard favours teaching history
A     as it was taught in Australia before the 1980s.
B     as it is taught in Australia now.
C     as it is taught in most other countries.
29    The new Russian holiday appears to demonstrate that Russia is
A     becoming less Communist.
B     strongly enforcing a link between ideology and history.
C     becoming opposed to the influence of western Christianity. 
30    History in South Africa is now taught differently because 
  A      of the collapse of communism.
B     of the collapse of rule by white people.
C     teachers are better than before.

Questions 31-35
Complete the following sentences using NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS from the text.
31     Many Irish people thought a simple view of history was _______________ in Northern Ireland.
32     The things that are taught in history classes often tell us how countries and people ____________.
33     The terms "multicultural" and "aboriginal reconciliation" can still be found in Australian _____________.
34    Judy King says John Howard would like _______________ rather than look at history from different standpoints.
35     In South Africa, changing a ____________ for another has been avoided.

Questions 36-40
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 3?
TRUE if the information in the text agrees with the statement
FALSEif the information in the text contradicts the statement
NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this
36   As Ireland became richer, Irish people became less interested in simple ideas. 37 Most countries believe learning about history should allow students to think for themselves.
38   The meanings of the words 'settlement' and 'invasion' are not the same.
39   A foundation story is an important part of history classes in Russia.
40  The new South African history curriculum aims to include different standpoints and bring people together.



